GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Deadly flooding
from the Mississippi River
forces evacuations
in Missouri and Illinois.
Also ahead: After decades' worth
of sexual
assault accusations, Bill Cosby
faces criminal
charges for the first time.
Did the U.S. spy on Israeli
government officials
as they lobbied Congress on the
Iran nuclear
deal?
Plus, Michael Pollan comes to
the defense
of food. The bestselling author
proposes an
alternative way to eat.
MICHAEL POLLAN, Author, "In
Defense of Food":
We need to kind of take back
control of our
diet from industry, which is
really trying
to get us at every stage to eat
more and drink
more than we even really want
to.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The water keeps
rising along the
Mississippi River and its
tributaries, and,
with it, the toll in death and
damage.
Several small towns have been
overwhelmed
across parts of Missouri and
Illinois, and
at least 20 people have been
killed in the
region. With the disaster still
building,
one local official said today,
"Nobody that
is living has ever seen anything
like this."
It's already bad in places like
Valley Park,
Missouri, outside Saint Louis.
Dozens of homes
and businesses are underwater,
and the Meramec
River isn't due to crest until
tomorrow at
a record 43 feet. The
floodwaters have also
closed a stretch of Interstate
44, and hundreds
of other roads and highways in
the region
are now submerged.
Today, Missouri Governor Jay
Nixon visited
the nearby town of Pacific,
where the flood
tide is also expected to set a
record.
GOV. JAY NIXON (D), Missouri:
Wind fights
upstream means water moves
downstream, and
so we are putting a pretty
significant concentration
down in those areas. We fully
expect to see
a continual rise in those areas
over the next
six to eight hours and then all
the way into
tonight.
GWEN IFILL: Farther south, in
High Ridge,
this water treatment plant has
been inundated,
and is spewing raw sewage into
nearby streams
and rivers. It could get even
worse if levees
give way. The Army Corps of
Engineers is watching
19 of the earthen barriers along
the swollen
Mississippi River and its
tributaries.
Meanwhile, sandbagging
operations are in full
force in Saint Louis, as
volunteers race against
time. Forecasters predict the
Mississippi
River will crest there tomorrow
evening at
nearly record levels.
MAN: We want to be very cautious
and sandbag
the low areas in case it would
come over.
Other areas, as you come up for
repair, are
in better shape with the pumping
stations
and everything else.
GWEN IFILL: The rising
Mississippi has already
spilled over its banks near the
city's iconic
Gateway Arch.
TOM KERR, Missouri: All our
friends and family
are losing everything.
GWEN IFILL: Across the region in
places, like
Uniontown, south of Saint Louis,
people insist
they will piece their lives back
together
once the water recedes.
TOM KERR: It's a very close, if
you say, family
around here. So, once it gets
down, everybody
will come out, friends, family,
everything.
We will help everybody get it
cleaned up and
see if we can rebuild and get
their lives
going back again.
GWEN IFILL: Flooding is also a
threat on the
other side of the Mississippi in
Illinois.
Crews in Alton worked through
the night to
shore up sandbag walls, hoping
to hold back
the deluge. This flooding now
rivals the great
flood disaster of 1993 along the
Mississippi.
In the day's other news, after
four years
of extreme drought, California
may be getting
at least a little relief. State
officials
reported today that snowfall has
deepened
the Sierra Nevada snowpack to
136 percent
of normal levels. That's three
times what
it was this time a year ago.
Come spring,
the melting snow could provide
nearly a third
of the state's water supply.
Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel
announced a major
overhaul of police training
today, amid a
storm of criticism over a fatal
shooting.
He said the city will put Tasers
in every
squad car and focus on getting
officers to
take a less confrontational
approach.
Still, he acknowledged at an
afternoon briefing,
it is going to take much more to
improve relations
between police and the public.
RAHM EMANUEL (D), Mayor of
Chicago: We have
a long history in this city.
That trust has
been frayed to the point that
it's broken.
And part of what we're doing
here, and I believe
we will be better off at the end
of the process,
is build a police department
that has the
trust of the community, that is
essential
for the safety that those
residents rely on.
GWEN IFILL: The mayor returned
early from
a vacation in Cuba, after police
killed two
black residents over the
weekend, one of them
accidentally. That added to the
protests over
a white officer who's now
charged with murder
for killing a black teenager
last year.
There's word of another terror
plot foiled,
this time in Turkey. Police in
Ankara say
they have arrested two Islamic
State suspects
accused of planning to attack
New Year's celebrations.
They were taken during a raid
today, and police
also recovered explosive devices
and suicide
vests. The suspects allegedly
planned to target
crowded bars and shops on New
Year's Eve.
Just yesterday, police in
Brussels, Belgium,
said they broke up a similar
plot. Today,
the city canceled its New Year's
Eve fireworks
and other festivities.
On the tech front, consumer
demands for streaming
video have fueled a surge in
Internet connection
speeds in the United States. The
federal government
-- the Federal Communications
Commission reports
they nearly tripled between 2011
and 2014.
But the U.S. still lags behind a
number of
other countries. Among the
states, New Jersey
has the fastest average download
time. Idaho
is slowest.
And Wall Street slowed down
today. The broader
market followed energy stocks
lower after
oil prices tumbled again. In the
end, the
Dow Jones industrial average
lost 117 points
to close back near 17600. The
Nasdaq fell
42 points, and the S&P 500 was
down 15.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Bill Cosby
charged with sexual assault; has
the NSA been
spying on Israel?; how Congress
managed to
get more done in 2015; and much
more.
spying on Israel?; how Congress
managed to
get more done in 2015; and much
more.
After dozens of allegations that
stretch back
decades, comedian Bill Cosby was
charged today,
for the first time, with sexual
assault.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The legendary
entertainer
exited a black SUV outside a
courthouse in
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
Cosby stands accused of drugging
and sexually
assaulting a woman named Andrea
Constand back
in 2004. Prosecutors back then
didn't seek
charges, citing a lack of
evidence. But, since
then, scores of other women have
accused Cosby
of similar assaults, all of
which he has steadfastly
denied.
At a press conference earlier
today, prosecutor
Kevin Steele said Ms. Constand
has rejected
several earlier sexual advances
from Cosby
before the alleged attack.
KEVIN STEELE, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania,
District Attorney: On the
evening in question,
Mr. Cosby urged her to take
pills that he
provided to her and to drink
wine, the effect
of which rendered her unable to
move or to
respond to his advances, and he
committed
aggravated indecent assault upon
her.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For more on
the case and
the Cosby story, we are joined
by Maryclaire
Dale of the Associated Press.
She's been covering
Cosby's legal battles in
Pennsylvania.
So, Maryclaire Dale, you were in
that tiny
courtroom in Pennsylvania today.
What was
it like? What did you see?
MARYCLAIRE DALE, Associated
Press: Yes, I
was.
It was a very brief hearing. It
was an arraignment,
in which a district justice,
basically a magistrate,
told Cosby what the charges
were. He didn't
have the opportunity to enter a
plea. In Pennsylvania,
that's typically done later.
Cosby seemed fairly relaxed,
given the situation.
He was smiling occasionally with
his lawyer.
He did seem a bit unsteady
walking. He had
some serious vision problems and
needed help
signing the court papers, the
bail papers
and such.
They had arranged -- he -- the
bail was set
at a million dollars and he has
posted that
and he is free tonight. But it
was a brief
hearing, again, quite a lot of
media there,
of course, although the charges
were not announced
until this morning at 10:00 a.m.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, help us
understand how
we got here. There have been so
many allegations
against Mr. Cosby over the
years. This current
complainant, Ms. Constand, had
previously
made a complaint back in 2004
against Cosby,
but the then prosecutor said
there wasn't
enough evidence to bring a case.
So how did we get to today?
MARYCLAIRE DALE: Right.
She was one of the first, if not
the first
accuser to go to the police, and
it ended
up with a decision by the then
Montgomery
County prosecutor that he didn't
have enough
evidence to move forward to
trial.
However, she then filed a civil
lawsuit that
was settled a year later in
2006, and the
-- Cosby had to give a
deposition in that
case. It was quite a lengthy
deposition given
over four days in 2005 and 2006,
and, of course,
it wasn't known to the public
what he said
at the time.
But after that, after he gave
his deposition,
the case settled, and, this
year, the Associated
Press went to court and tried to
unseal some
of the sealed documents in the
case. And we
were successful in getting some
filings that
had parts of his deposition. And
they included
his acknowledgment that, in the
'70s, he had
obtained quaaludes with the hope
of giving
them to women that he had hoped
to seduce.
And that, in addition to a
number of other
women who had started to come
forward, I think
that encouraged even more women
to come forward.
And with that deposition, the
prosecutors
in Montgomery County today went
and took another
look at the case and decided
today, with the
announcement, that they did now
have enough
to build a case, a criminal case
against Cosby.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, it was
Cosby's own words
from 10 years ago that got him
in the trouble
today?
MARYCLAIRE DALE: That was in
part.
They were running up against a
12-year statute
of limitations on the filing of
felony sexual
assault cases. Certainly, they
do believe
that his acknowledgment that he
has in the
past obtained drugs to use with
women, they
said that was part of it.
Another part is, they now
believe they can
prove that the woman was
impaired and could
not give consent. In the
deposition, Cosby
says that he acknowledges that
he had a sexual
situation with this woman that
night in his
home near Philadelphia, but he
says it was
consensual.
But prosecutors now believe
that, with this
evidence and his statement in
the deposition
that he gave her three pills, he
says they
were Benadryl. The lawyer for
Ms. Constand
believes they were probably
stronger. So,
prosecutors feel sure that they
can prove
in court that she was too
impaired that night
by both wine and whatever pills
he gave her
to give any type of consent.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, the
prosecutor is arguing
that she was basically
intoxicated at Mr.
Cosby's hand, it seems, and that
she couldn't
say yes or no; she could not
consent to sexual
activity?
MARYCLAIRE DALE: Exactly.
In fact, in the affidavit, the
20-page police
affidavit filed today in support
of the charges,
it says that she was -- quote,
unquote -- "frozen"
and semi-paralyzed, moving in
and out of consciousness,
and unable to shout or
articulate her, you
know, lack of consent, in fact.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Is it clear
whether or not
that deposition from 10 years
ago can be used
in this current case against
Cosby?
MARYCLAIRE DALE: Well,
certainly, that's one
of the many defense motions that
we would
expect to come during -- before
the trial
plays out at the preliminary --
at the pretrial
stage.
I'm sure they will try to have
that deposition,
which was, again, from a civil
lawsuit, you
know, not -- ruled inadmissible.
Prosecutors,
of course, will try to use it.
They're building
their case somewhat upon his
very own words.
The other thing that could be of
interest
is -- in the trial is whether or
not the subject
allows any or many of the other
accusers to
come forward and tell their
story as sort
of similar-act evidence,
evidence of Cosby's
M.O., for instance. There are
times when that
is permissible under
Pennsylvania law. It
can't be -- it has to be a
fairly substantial
relationship to the crime that
is charged.
So, it will be up to the judge
to determine
whether the facts of other
accusations or
other cases are close enough to
be used by
prosecutors to show an alleged
pattern of
behavior. Certainly, that's
something the
defense will try to throw out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Maryclaire Dale
of the Associated Press, thank
you very much.
MARYCLAIRE DALE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: The rift between the
U.S. and
Israel over the Iran deal was no
secret, but
GWEN IFILL: The rift between the
U.S. and
Israel over the Iran deal was no
secret, but
we now learn the dispute was fed
by high-stakes
political espionage carried out
by both countries
and ensnaring members of
Congress.
The details were laid out on the
front page
of today's Wall Street Journal.
Reporter Adam Entous has been
piecing together
the story for months, and he
joins me now.
Adam, what is more surprising to
you after
all the reporting that you have
done, that
there was spying going on, or
that we are
-- or who we were spying on?
ADAM ENTOUS, The Wall Street
Journal: I think,
for me, it was the unintended
consequence,
where the president of the
United States decides
that he doesn't know what Bibi
Netanyahu,
his counterpart, intends on
doing.
And so he tells his spy agencies
to prioritize
going and collecting information
about what
his intentions are. And then
what happened,
when Bibi Netanyahu came to
Congress and launched
what was probably the largest
lobbying campaign
by a foreign government in our
Congress, and
the NSA, the National Security
Agency, is
listening very closely to what
the Israelis
are doing.
And, suddenly, they're talking
every day to
members of Congress. And this is
a dilemma.
What is the proper use of that
information?
And the White House thought
about it. They
knew that this was tantalizing.
They also
knew, if they asked for it, they
would get
in a lot of trouble, so they
decided not to
do -- to not to decide.
They decided to tell the NSA,
you decide.
You figure it out. We will take
what you send
us. And we're not going to ask
for more.
GWEN IFILL: Which is more
troubling in the
end, the fact that the president
had said
at some point, you know, we're
not going to
spy on our friends, with a
couple of exceptions
-- they didn't say who the
exceptions were
-- or the fact that Israel was
so intricately
involved in U.S. foreign
policy-making?
ADAM ENTOUS: Right. Right.
When the president said in 2014
that he would
stop spying on our closest
friends and allies,
the heads of state, he also had
a carve-out
which he did mention in his
speech, if that
information that could be
gleaned from those
leaders was of significant
national intelligence,
national security purpose, or
was important
for national security, so he
gave himself
wiggle room.
But he didn't define what that
process would
be, who would be those leaders
that would
be protected and who wouldn't be
protected.
And what we discovered when we
looked at this
closely was, they created a
list. It's called
the protected list. And the
chancellor of
Germany, Merkel, was put on that
list. It
was sort of seen as a no-brainer
you would
put her on that list.
She was very vocal in her
criticism. Also,
Hollande of France was put on
the list. When
they went to other NATO --
another NATO leader,
Erdogan of Turkey, they
realized, wait a minute,
we don't really understand his
policy in Syria,
so they decided they wouldn't
put him on the
last, which basically meant that
the NSA could
target him.
With Bibi Netanyahu, there was
no debate.
Of course they weren't going to,
as they say,
go dark on Bibi. They weren't
going to stop
collecting against him.
GWEN IFILL: How involved was --
well, first
of all, is Israel also spying on
the U.S.,
and how much of a problem was
it, as the U.S.
was collecting this information,
that they
swept up U.S. lawmakers in some
of their eavesdropping?
ADAM ENTOUS: Yes.
I mean, the Israeli government
has -- they
say publicly that they do not
commit espionage
against the United States.
That's their policy.
That's what they say their
policy is. If you
talk to U.S. counterintelligence
officials,
they will tell you that Israel
is probably
the number one ally that spies
on the United
States.
So, you have a he said/she said
here. You're
not really sure. With regard to
collection
that happened incidentally to
capture communications
or the contents of
communications about lawmakers,
it definitely was something
that, within the
White House, they knew they
faced a very awkward
situation.
GWEN IFILL: Wasn't that exactly
what some
lawmakers had been worried about
and had been
criticizing the administration
on?
ADAM ENTOUS: Yes, to a certain
degree.
And the thing to keep in mind
here is that
there's things that we don't
know yet. There
are different types of
communications that
are collected by the NSA, where
the prime
minister of Israel speaks to a
senator on
the phone. Is the NSA listening
to that?
Or if the ambassador to Israel
goes and meets
with 20 lawmakers during this
debate and writes
a report that he then sends back
to his Foreign
Ministry detailing the
conversations he had
on the Hill, what type of
communications were
they collecting, and which of
those were they
passing onto the White House,
and what were
the rules?
We know what they told -- we
know what administration
officials told us, which is
that, no matter
what, they minimized -- the term
is minimized.
That means they didn't identify
the name of
the lawmaker, so it would just
appear in the
report that the NSA sent that it
was a...
GWEN IFILL: To stay on this side
of the law.
ADAM ENTOUS: The rule is to not
identify.
If the White House wants to
know, they can
ask. But if they ask and the NSA
agrees to
provide it, then they have to
notify the Intelligence
Committees.
GWEN IFILL: Briefly, was there
any blowback
today on this from either Israel
or, say,
Turkey?
ADAM ENTOUS: I haven't seen much
from Turkey.
From Israel, basically, they
said that they
were appalled that this would be
happening,
that the president would be
spying on his
close ally Netanyahu, and they
basically said
that they would consider a
complaint, some
sort of complaint that they
would file to
try to get the U.S. to stop the
surveillance.
GWEN IFILL: It's an interesting
peek behind
the curtain, Adam Entous. You
have been doing
it all year. Thank you very
much.
ADAM ENTOUS: Oh, pleasure.
Pleasure. Thank
you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Should scientists
be allowed to edit human genes?;
tracing the
path our ancestors walked two
million years
ago; and why we should get back
to the basics
when it comes to food.
But, first, Congress ended the
year on an
unusually productive note,
despite partisanship
and divided government.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins explains
how that happened.
LISA DESJARDINS: In what has
been the Capitol
of gridlock, 2015 brought signs
of legislative
life and a measure of pride.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
As we end the year, I think, by
any objective
standard, it's been a year of
significant
accomplishment. And I want to
thank the Democrats
who did cooperate.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I also want to give Speaker Ryan
credit. I
called both him and Mitch
McConnell, as well
as Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid,
for the orderly
way in which they actually
negotiated a budget.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
I look forward to, in 2016, just
like we have
in the last six weeks, getting
Congress working
back on the way it should be
working.
LISA DESJARDINS: The bipartisan
lovefest came
after congressional leaders and
the White
House agreed to a rare full-year
bill to fund
the government. A
trillion-dollar compromise
passed with a majority of both
Democrats and
Republicans capped off a wild,
but productive
last month.
Of course, some things on the
congressional
done list were political feats.
For the first
time, Republicans passed a
repeal of Obamacare
through both houses, forcing a
presidential
veto. But what stood out was the
long-term
legislation that made it into
law. Call it
the punt list: problems that
Congress had
kicked down the road year after
year, including
pay for Medicare doctors, who
had faced potential
pay cuts for more than a decade.
This time, Congress passed a
five-year fix
that bases pay on quality of
care. Also, tax
cuts, a series of technically
temporary, but,
in fact, every year of tax cuts
were made
permanent. And a big one,
highway funding
-- after 34 short-term patches,
Congress passed
a five-year long-term plan. That
was a breakthrough
for every state in America.
Pete Ruane is a lobbyist of the
American Road
and Transportation Builders
Association and
says lawmakers found a way to
agree.
PETE RUANE, American Road and
Transportation
Builders Association: Frankly,
there was a
fatigue factor on Capitol Hill.
They have
been dealing with this so long.
And I think
they were looking for
substantive, tangible
accomplishments, ones that did
have bipartisan
support.
And the transportation
legislation was ideal
for that. So, there was serious
interest in
actually doing something this
year, and that
worked in its favor to getting
it done in
2015.
LISA DESJARDINS: Another factor?
Years of
building tension among house
Republicans finally
burst, forcing out House Speaker
John Boehner.
But, on his way out, Boehner
pushed through
tough bills, like raising the
debt ceiling.
In the end, Republicans
compromised with themselves,
boosting the military and other
priorities,
but at the cost of raising the
deficit. That
said, if you think all of this
means a productive
2016, think again.
Congress typically doesn't pass
major legislation
in an election year.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: It's been called the
scientific
breakthrough of the year, and a
development
that could revolutionize
medicine. It's all
about a way of editing genes,
known as CRISPR.
The new method allows scientists
to snip out
a faulty section of DNA and
replace specific
genes in living cells.
Researchers have long
edited genes in the lab, but
CRISPR is cheaper,
far more precise, and could even
be used in
DNA found in eggs and sperm.
It has lots of promise, but it
has raised
many concerns too.
We explore those questions with
Jennifer Doudna,
a professor at the University of
California,
Berkeley, who helped develop
this breakthrough,
and Paul Knoepfler, a biologist
and writer
from at University of
California, Davis.
Welcome to you both.
Jennifer Doudna, I'm going to
start by just
asking you to define in
laywoman's language
gene editing and CRISPR.
JENNIFER DOUDNA, University of
California,
Berkeley: Well, I would say gene
editing is
a method of making very precise
changes to
the DNA in a cell, and the
CRISPR methodology
allows scientists to do that
with just really
unprecedented precision.
GWEN IFILL: So, there is a
targeted, practical
use for this?
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Indeed,
actually many.
It's a technology that operates
in basically
all types of cells and allows
very precise
changes to be made to the
genetic code that
allows scientists to do things
like explore
the function of genes and also,
in principle,
correct mutations that cause
disease.
GWEN IFILL: So, give me an
example of how
this would be applied
practically. Blood diseases,
for instance? Eyes? What kind of
uses?
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Well, I think,
in the future,
there are very exciting
applications to cure
diseases in the blood and
potentially in the
eye and potentially in other
kinds of tissues
as well.
I think a lot of people are
excited about
the blood, because it's a tissue
where, in
principle, at least, we can
deliver this kind
of technology to cells outside
the body, and
then put those corrected cells
back into a
patient.
GWEN IFILL: Paul Knoepfler, I
know this is
already in use in some labs
around the country.
Do you find it exciting or do
you see it a
little bit troubling?
PAUL KNOEPFLER, University of
California,
Davis: It's actually very
exciting. I have
been working on gene editing in
the lab, in
test tubes and in rodents for 15
or 20 years.
And CRISPR really represents,
you know, a
transformative technology. I
would say it
-- you know, if you put a number
on it, it's
probably, you know, 10 times
better than what
we used to do.
And, in a sense, this allows us
to do all
kinds of new research, but it's
almost too
good, because I think it's also
kind of opening
the door to a new frontier of
gene editing
in human beings.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
that new frontier
for a moment, Mr. Knoepfler,
because it seems
to me that, when I think of gene
editing,
I think of being able to go in
and actually
change outcomes, change what a
baby looks
like, change who the baby is,
for instance,
in the womb.
Is this something that CRISPR
would allow,
not right now, but at some
point?
PAUL KNOEPFLER: You know, it is
possible in
the future.
I think, right now, the vast
majority of us
who are working on CRISPR, you
know, we really
have no interest in making
designer babies.
We want to advance science
through research.
And, you know, I think our top
priority, if
we do go into humans, it's going
to be preventing
specific genetic diseases.
But I think where we run into
trouble is,
there is sort of a spectrum of
what could
be done with this, and there is
certainly
some proponents of actually
enhancing people
and going the designer baby
route. And that's
something that I find very
concerning.
So I have been speaking out on
that. And I
actually just came out with a
new book called
"GMO Sapiens" where I address
some of the
concerns here.
GWEN IFILL: Jennifer Doudna,
you're nodding
in agreement, but you're also
aware that the
National Institutes of Health
have put a moratorium
on funding this kind of
research. Does that
mean that there are widespread
concerns about
its uses?
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Well, I think
there is widespread
awareness that this is powerful
technology
that needs to be employed in a
prudent fashion.
As you may know, I have been
quite involved
in the ethical discussions
around this technology.
And, in fact, earlier in
December of this
year, we had a meeting in
Washington, D.C.,
that was sponsored by three
different national
academies in China, the U.K. and
the U.S.
to discuss this very issue.
And so this is an area where
many scientists
and clinicians and obviously
other stakeholders
are getting involved in the
discussion.
GWEN IFILL: And also another
stakeholder in
this are private companies. Even
if the government
won't fund the research, what's
to stop a
private company from forging
ahead on this?
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Exactly. I
mean, right now,
nothing.
So, this is something where, I
think, again,
the scientific community needs
to step forward
and really point out what the
issues are with
the technology that can be
employed for the
kind of genome editing that
could affect human
evolution.
GWEN IFILL: Paul Knoepfler,
could we be sacrificing
accuracy for speed?
PAUL KNOEPFLER: I think so.
I think, you know, CRISPR is
much more accurate
than the kinds of technology we
used in the
past, but I think it's not
accurate enough
right now to actually use it
either in humans
or for the creation of a new
human being,
say, with a corrected genetic
mutation.
And, so, one of the exciting
things about
CRISPR is that it's evolving so
fast that
I think even by, say, the middle
of 2016,
it's going to be more accurate,
it's going
to be more powerful than it is
today. So,
you know, perhaps one of the
challenges is
going to be, where do we stop
and say, you
know, it's good enough, it's
accurate enough,
where we could, say, use it for
gene therapy
or something like that?
GWEN IFILL: When we're talking
about clinical
trials to use it for something
like that,
are we anticipating that could
happen relatively
soon, Jennifer Doudna?
(CROSSTALK)
PAUL KNOEPFLER: Oh, sorry. Go
ahead.
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Well, my guess
would be,
within a couple of years, we
will see initial
clinical trials. That's what I'm
guessing,
based on the pace of the field
right now.
GWEN IFILL: And, Paul Knoepfler,
you agree
with that, obviously?
PAUL KNOEPFLER: Yes, I think so.
I think, for gene therapy work,
it would be
appropriate to go ahead with it
in the next
few years. Where I'm more
concerned is, there
is fertility clinics, some
philosophers and
others who are saying, let's not
stop there,
let's go ahead and let's try to
make better
human beings.
And I think we can kind of put
better in quotation
marks, but who decides what's
better? And,
you know, if they were trying to
make a child
who has dodged a bone disease,
you know, what
if that child is not just
healthy, their bones
are better than anyone else's in
the world,
you know?
And so, you know, would you
resist the temptation
perhaps to get stronger bones,
bigger muscles?
I guess I feel like it's a tough
thing to
draw the line between medical
application
and human enhancement.
GWEN IFILL: Well, then, how do
you draw that
line? Say you want to be able to
find a cure
for sickle cell anemia and this
gets you a
lot closer to it faster.
Jennifer Doudna, what happens
if, say, that
makes for a better person who
has to say to
their mate 10 years down the
road, 20 years
down the road, by the way, I am
genetically
altered, before we have
children?
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Well, yes, I
think that's
still a bit in the future.
I do think that the CRISPR
technology offers
a way to discover the function
of genes. And
one of the things that currently
limits the
field is just the lack of
knowledge about
the genetic basis for all sorts
of traits,
including disease, but other
things as well.
And so I think this is where we
will see a
lot of active work in the
immediate future,
is really on the research front.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me assume
for a moment
that we figure out where these
lines should
be drawn and this is an
unalloyed good in
the long run.
I want to ask each of you,
finally, Paul Knoepfler,
starting with you, how big a
leap forward
is this?
PAUL KNOEPFLER: I think it's
transformative.
I think it's as big as nuclear
physics or
something like that. I think,
you know, one
of the most exciting and also
frightening
aspects of it is that it's going
to enable
us to literally change
ourselves, you know,
and kind of hack into the human
code.
And so I think, you know, that's
unprecedented
in history. And so, as we're
doing that, as
we're changing ourselves, I
think, you know,
whether that's in five years, 10
years, I
do think someone's going to do
that. And so,
you know, that's very exciting
again, but
terrifically scary, because, you
know, what
will we become? What will we
become in the
future?
GWEN IFILL: Well, Jennifer
Doudna, how do
we balance that out? This
hacking into the
human code sounds exciting to a
scientist,
but might sound scary to a
layperson.
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Right.
Well, again, my feeling all
along is has been
that I feel, as Paul just said,
very, very
excited about the potential for
this technology
to affect human societies in the
future in
positive ways. But I do think
that it's a
powerful technology. There's no
question.
And it needs to be handled with
appropriate
caution.
GWEN IFILL: Jennifer Doudna,
Paul Knoepfler,
thank you both very much.
PAUL KNOEPFLER: Thank you.
JENNIFER DOUDNA: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Since January 2013,
journalist
Paul Salopek has tracked ancient
man's path
out of Africa, what he calls the
Out of Eden
Walk.
Tonight, we take another look at
Hari Sreenivasan's
visit and walk with Paul, as
they trace the
footsteps of early man on his
global trek.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
fog-shrouded fields
and rolling hills of Southern
Georgia are
much more than a waypoint for
Paul Salopek.
We were nearing the ancient city
and archaeological
site of Dmanisi.
PAUL SALOPEK, Fellow, National
Geographic:
So, Dmanisi is finally in sight
and this is
probably one of the most
important human migration
sites outside of Africa proper.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Salopek is
following the
path humans took after the Ice
Age, 70,000
to 100,000 years ago. But here
in Dmanisi,
that path is much older.
Along these green and jagged
river gorges,
we have walked in one form or
another for
nearly two million years. The
history here
is stacked high, part of what
Salopek calls
the layer cake effect of the
Caucasus. With
a happy dog welcoming us, we
passed what was
likely an outer defensive tower
of the 1,400-year-old
city of Dmanisi.
This has been a crossroads for a
long time.
PAUL SALOPEK: From day one. And
pretty much
everybody invaded it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And was this a
trading route?
PAUL SALOPEK: This was a silk
road trading
route city, a big shining city
on the hill,
very rich, until the Mongols
came and plundered
it. And then they were here a
few hundred
years until the Georgians and
Armenians pushed
them out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's an
archaeological gold
mine. With the summer digging
season finished,
we arrived at a sort of bunk
house for archaeologists
to rest for the night.
PAUL SALOPEK: If we did, by some
miracle,
get a clear sky, it really will
change everything
completely.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The next
morning, a miracle
had indeed swept away the fog.
Within what
you're seeing is nearly two
million years
of history, the medieval city,
whose walls
still stand, built on top of a
Bronze Age
settlement that's 5,000 years
old, and still
beneath that, the 1.8
million-year-old remains
of one of modern human's
earliest ancestors.
Salopek, Dima Bit-Suleiman, his
walking partner
in Georgia, and I were joined by
the director
of Georgia's National Museum,
David Lordkipanidze,
for the walk up to the hilltop
dig site.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE, Director,
Georgia National
Museum: What we found here, it
changed our
understanding about early traces
of human
evolution, about first dispersal
of our ancestors.
And, also, it's completely
changed our views
about who, when left Africa and
how they were
looking and what they were doing
also.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What were
these guys doing?
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: These guys
were enjoying
life here.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Enjoying life
in a place
much more lush and temperate 1.8
million years
ago. Thanks to bones discovered
here at the
same latitude as Boston, we know
this was
a land with game-like elephant,
giraffe, and
rhinoceros, but also large
predators like
saber-toothed cats.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, when they
come here,
are they the predator or are
they the prey?
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: I think
they were both.
On the bones of the humans, you
can sometimes
see cut marks, so it shows that
they were
prey. But, you see, it's lucky
for archaeology,
right?
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Bad day for
them, good day
for you.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: Yes. We are
very lucky.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that lucky
day came
10 years ago, with the discovery
of a skull,
the last of five found that is
the remarkably
complete skull of an ancient
ancestor of modern
man.
So this is it?
David took us to the National
Museum in the
capital city of Tbilisi to see
the actual
skulls kept in a vault and
handled with kid
gloves, because they are indeed
national treasures.
This is how old?
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: This is 1.8
million years
old.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The brain
capacity was about
40 percent of ours, and they
stood about 5
feet tall. The skull has
features of three
different species, a possible
snapshot in
time of evolution. An older
adult, probably
a male, was among those found.
And the toothless,
worn jawbone might tell us more
than just
size and age.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: It means it
was weak
individual who could survive
only with help
of others. And I think that
Dmanisi shows
also the first traces of
compassions and solidarity
in Homo erectus.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Homo
erectus, even though
they had a brain that was a
third our size,
they still cared for somebody
other than themselves.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: One of the
human characters
could be taking on others.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Taking care of
others.
How did these guys get to
Dmanisi? Why did
they leave?
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: See, I
don't think there
was just one reason of it. They
were able
to do it. They wanted to do it.
I think main
human character is the
curiosity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So this is the
same instinct
that we have today, to look
around the next
corner, over the next hill.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: Paul is
doing the same.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As these guys
did.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: As these
guys did. Paul
is follower of Homo erectus.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, in a
sense, so are
we all. But for Salopek, their
ancient journey
to this point has particular
meaning.
PAUL SALOPEK: These are the
first pioneer
wanderers. These are kind of
like the dawn
people who first left our
collective home
in Africa. So being here is a
terrific echo
of my own project. I'm following
people who
came much later, but these were
the trailblazers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Only 10
percent of this
sprawling site has been
excavated. That layered
effect was evident everywhere.
So, where are you taking me?
In a deep pit, David showed us
where an ancient
wine maker had sunk his vat.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: You can see
1.8 million
years old.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The bone is
1.8 million
years old.
And, in the process, that person
had tossed
aside some of the much older
bones.
This wine jar is how old?
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: It's a
1,000 years old.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know,
finding a 1,000-year
wine jar would be kind of a big
deal for anybody
else.
DAVID LORDKIPANIDZE: Not for a
paleontologist.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: But there are
few better
places for a writer gauging the
crosscurrents
of history. So, with sunset not
far off, Paul
and I walked to the top of the
citadel that
has stood here for 1,000 years,
a relative
blink of an eye geologically
speaking, the
majesty of this place clear,
spread out before
us, and perhaps a key to its
fraught and important
past.
So, why is this place such a
crossroads?
PAUL SALOPEK: Well, it's an
antique bridge
between Asia and Europe and has
been for millennia.
And there has been migration
routes through
here going back before memory.
The silk road passes through
here. But it
also is the epicenter where
three major empires
meet. And they have always
contested this
area. From the south, the
Persians, from the
West, the Ottoman Empire, which
is today Turkey,
and from the north, more
recently, Russia.
They have overlapped and
contested and fought
over this corner of the world
for centuries.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, if they
have lived here,
they have also died here.
PAUL SALOPEK: A lot of people
have died here
over the years. I think we're
standing on
one of the oldest boneyards in
the world.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Atop the
boneyard in Dmanisi,
Georgia, I'm Hari Sreenivasan
for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: Paul Salopek has
continued walking
since Hari caught up with him in
Georgia.
He's now crossed into
Azerbaijan.
Salopek's work is supported in
part by the
Pulitzer Center for Crisis
Reporting, which
also partners with the
"NewsHour."
For more on Salopek's walk,
including some
of Hari's photos and thoughts,
head online
to our site at PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: After leaving
Georgia, Paul Salopek
traveled through Azerbaijan and
is continuing
his walk across Central Asia on
the road to
China.
Salopek's work is supported in
part by the
Pulitzer Center for Crisis
Reporting, which
also partners with the
"NewsHour."
For more on his walk, head
online to our site
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now: a call to arms for making
real, instead
of processed food a bigger part
of Americans'
diets, a push for more sensible
nutritional
policies, and the influence of
marketing.
That's the focus of Michael
Pollan bestselling
book "In Defense of Food."
A new film with the same title
prepares to
-- premieres tonight on PBS.
Here's a preview.
MICHAEL POLLAN, Author, "In
Defense of Food":
I have been writing about the
food system
for a very long time, but what I
kept hearing
from readers was, yes, yes, yes,
you have
told me where the food comes
from and how
the animals live and everything,
but what
I really want to know is, what
should I eat?
We make over 200 decisions about
food a day,
and the majority of these
decisions are basically
unconscious to us.
The food industry has gotten
incredibly food
at manipulating the properties
of food, so
it has just the right texture,
just the right
color, just the right smell.
But we have been paying a heavy
price.
Four of the top 10 things that
will kill you
are chronic diseases linked to
diet.
MAN: We're dealing with a crisis
that's at
an emergency level. Their lives
are at stake.
I think all of our lives are at
stake.
MAN: We are looking for answers.
We are looking
for dietary salvation.
MICHAEL POLLAN: So I studied the
science from
Tanzania to Peru, from Paris to
the Bronx.
MAN: Let's walk our way through
this.
MICHAEL POLLAN: And what I
discovered will
surprise you.
WOMAN: You don't have to be a
scientist to
know how to eat.
MICHAEL POLLAN: It was just like
a light had
gone off.
It's very rare in our lives when
the answer
to a complicated question is so
simple. But
when it comes to eating, it is.
GWEN IFILL: Michael Pollan
joined Jeffrey
Brown recently for a
conversation about the
book and the documentary.
JEFFREY BROWN: Michael, welcome
to you.
MICHAEL POLLAN: Thank you,
Jeffrey.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let's start with
the title
of the film, "In Defense of
Food."
You're arguing that food needs
defending,
in part because we just don't --
we're confused
about we mean by the term.
MICHAEL POLLAN: Yes.
The word is up for grabs,
because food has
changed more in the last 75
years than it
has in the previous 10,000. We
have learned
how to process foods in whole
new ways. And
I would argue that we're
creating things that
don't deserve to be called by
that beautiful
word. And so I call them edible
food-like
substances.
JEFFREY BROWN: You talk about
how we're all
caught up in the grips of
something you call
nutritionism. Now, define that
and explain
the problem.
MICHAEL POLLAN: Sure.
Yes, nutritionism, it's not a
science, although
it's supposedly based on
nutrition science.
It's an ideology. It's a way of
thinking about
food that I think is at the root
of our national
eating disorder. It's why we're
so anxious
and confused about food.
Nutritionism basically argues
that foods,
the important things about foods
are the nutrients
they contain. It's not the whole
food itself.
We don't look at a piece of
meat. We should
be thinking about saturated fat
and heme iron
and things like that.
It also, by extension, argues,
if the nutrient
is what is important in food,
and nutrients
are invisible to most people, we
need experts
to tell us how to eat. And I
think that's
a very dangerous idea.
JEFFREY BROWN: And therefore
being led by
the advertising in some cases,
right?
MICHAEL POLLAN: Well, exactly.
The expert message we hear the
most is the
message of industry, which
spends more than
$30 billion a year to market
food to us. By
comparison, the government's
voice, the doctor's
voice, the voice of sanity gets
drowned out.
And so we walk into a
treacherous landscape
in the supermarket, where we're
bombarded
with health claims that are very
often deceptive.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, these are
added nutrients.
This is fat, low fat, nonfat.
And give me
-- give us a good example.
MICHAEL POLLAN: Well, I mean,
the cereal aisle
is a wonderful example.
You walk down there and you find
cereals that
are going to prevent heart
attacks and extend
your life span, I mean, just
outrageous claims
that are made. And the
government has been
trying to tone them down, but
every time they
have a new rule, industry comes
up with another
way to make the same claims.
Yet, keep in mind that, when
you're looking
at the really healthy food and
you're over
in produce, notice how quiet it
is. The broccoli
is not screaming about its whole
grain goodness
or the fact that it has no fat.
So, that's an important rule of
thumb, that
the healthiest foods in the
supermarket are
the quietest.
JEFFREY BROWN: The quieter the
food, the better
for you, huh?
MICHAEL POLLAN: The silence of
the yams, we
should listen to.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, the
film looks at
different ways of changing
behavior. And if
there's a core message that came
through to
me, is that there really are a
lot of things
that one can do individually and
community-wise.
You look at a lot of examples.
MICHAEL POLLAN: Well, this is a
very solvable
problem.
It's true that the food
landscape has gotten
treacherous. On the other hand,
we still know
what to do. And a lot of the
science in the
film ends up being really a
confirmation of
common sense, that if you eat
lots of plants,
you're better off than eating
lots of meat.
It's not to say meat is evil or
it's bad for
you. It's not. It's very
nutritious food,
but we eat way too much of it,
both for our
health and for the health of the
environment.
There's a lot of interesting
things about
how the environment shapes our
eating. So,
for example, the size of the
plates you use
at home, merely by reducing the
diameter of
the plates by an inch or two,
you can reduce
your food consumption by 20
percent or 30
percent without even thinking
about it.
So, we're being -- getting all
these messages
about that's -- that 16 ounces
is the proper
size for a soda, or that, you
know, a burrito
should be two pounds. And we
tend to do what
we're told. We have a thing
called a unit
bias. If that's how much you
pour in the glass,
that's a proper portion.
That's crazy. So, we need to
kind of take
back control of our diet from
industry, which
is really trying to get us at
every stage
to eat more and drink more than
we really
even want to.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what about at
the policy
level? Because we are at another
moment, right,
where the government -- new
dietary guidelines
are in the works, coming out
pretty soon.
MICHAEL POLLAN: Yes.
Every five years, the government
endeavors
to tell us what to eat. We don't
really listen,
but it's an interesting
conversation. And
they will be coming out in a few
weeks, a
new set of dietary guidelines.
And, you know,
hopefully, they will be more
progressive than
in the past.
But, in the past, they have
really fallen
into that nutritionism frame of
saying, you
know, eat more of this nutrient,
eat less
of that nutrient, this is evil,
this is good.
Need to remember that those
guidelines have
been wrong in the past. They
were telling
us for many years to eat less
fat, that fat
was what was going to make us
fat and give
us heart disease. Well, in fact,
that consensus
-- this is something we cover in
detail in
the film -- the consensus around
the low-fat
campaign has completely
collapsed, even though
your cardiologist probably
hasn't told you.
The links between fat and heart
disease or
the links between fat and
obesity are actually
very slender.
JEFFREY BROWN: And I have to ask
you, Michael,
finally, to the extent that this
is sort of
a personal quest for you in the
film and in
your books, where do you break
the rules?
What's your worst eating habit?
What's the
Michael Pollan bad eating?
MICHAEL POLLAN: Well, like
everybody, I struggle
with quantity, when to stop. I
love to eat.
I love food. I have my junk food
favorites.
I have kind of a weakness for
Cracker Jacks.
I will admit that.
But my point in the film is, we
shouldn't
stress so much about that, and
the issue is
not the special occasion food.
It's the everyday
default practice. It's not
having a soda.
It's having a soda every day.
And so, if you get the basic
default down,
you can indulge. I mean, one of
my food rules
is from -- borrowed from Oscar
Wilde, all
things in moderation, including
moderation.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, "In
Defense of Food."
Michael Pollan, thanks so much.
MICHAEL POLLAN: Thank you,
Jeffrey.
GWEN IFILL: Kind of staying with
that theme,
finally tonight, the holidays
seemed a good
time for an encore look at
author Ylonda Gault's
take on another particularly
challenging family
issue: the personality of the
bragging parent.
YLONDA GAULT, Author: It will
start innocently,
a chance run-in.
I will see a fellow mom at the
grocery store
or the park, maybe a coffee
shop. I will say,
hey, girl. We will hug. At least
I will, because
I'm a hugger.
I will compliment her outfit.
She may notice
my new highlights. We will trade
innocent
gossip. I will ask about her
work, then the
family, to which she will
respond with a sigh,
as though fatigued, because, for
moms, every
season touts tired as the new
black.
Thus begins the humble brag,
feigning exasperation.
Said mom will half-giggle and
wax self-mocking.
Well, Sophie scored 2,200 on her
MDNM/SATs,
despite this slacker mom, who
forgot to get
new calculator batteries. And
Zach's fourth
grade teacher recommended him
for advanced
calculus.
Meanwhile, his dad and I don't
still get new
math, old math, or even everyday
math. These
kids, I tell you.
A wan smile will wash over my
face. It's the
expression I usually reserve for
my 8-year-old
when he's regaling with my
intricate details
of obscure superheroes and their
powers.
When she laughs and throws her
head back,
I do the same thing on the
outside. Inside,
I wince, and whisper to myself,
bless her
heart, as momma would say.
For black people, those sweet
little words
are a nice way of saying, how
pitiful.
It's a gracious phrase, and I
mean it in the
best possible way, because a
part of me truly
aches to see a grown woman,
smart and accomplished
in her own right, boasting about
her children
as though they were prized
heifers at the
county fair.
And it's odd to me, because,
growing up, momma
always played down what my
siblings and I
did. It may be a black thing,
but I think
it's also an old-school thing.
No one wanted
their kids to get too
big-headed, I suppose.
Importantly, parenting wasn't an
extreme sport
back in the day. And, remember,
there was
no Facebook. Social media posts
are the lifeblood
of the humble braggart.
I get it. They feel less secure
in their own
worth, so tethered are the
kiddos to their
own self-image, the offsprings'
accomplishments
become their own.
Intellectually, I know most
studies will show
that mothers and fathers
hell-bent on this
image of perfection desperately
need the world
to take note of their kids'
awesomeness. It's
a way of saying, see, my kids
are great. Therefore,
I am great. Look at me. See? I'm
a great parent.
Really, I am.
Do they believe it? Sadly, I
don't think so.
It's not that these parents
don't have good
kids. I mean, all kids are good,
right, just
like all babies are -- ahem --
cute.
See, all moms lie. As the humble
braggart
prattles on, I pretend to
listen. And when
she's done, I put on my best
girlfriend face
and try to sound super
astonished. I say,
wow. Go, you.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight -- online,
that is -- as we prepare to kick
off 2016,
it's a good time to reflect on
some of the
predictions we made this time
last year.
For one of our Making Sense
columnists, that
included forecasts on the global
economy,
international politics, and oil
prices. See
how his predictions fared.
That's on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, Jeff Brown looks
back at the
year's best movies.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.